* Summary

The resolution of linear systems is a fundamental problem in the modern world. Fields such as physics, chemistry, finance, and artificial intelligence are permeated with such systems because they allow for modeling various real-world scenarios. The search for increasingly effective and efficient algorithms to solve this class of problems is more necessary than ever. This thesis presents two completely different approaches: the Conjugate Gradient method, a well-known classical algorithm, and the HHL algorithm, a well-known quantum algorithm. A comparison and the main differences between classical and quantum computation are presented, along with the potential advantages of the latter. The theory of the algorithms is analyzed, and their capabilities are tested.
In this paper, an educational approach has been taken. The necessary physical concepts are presented with particular attention to their mathematical aspects. The first chapter explains the basic concepts of quantum computation, providing some examples to aid in understanding the rest of the thesis. The second chapter is dedicated to the Conjugate Gradient method, a valid classical algorithm for solving linear systems. The gradient method is introduced, leading to the construction of the Conjugate Gradient method. Various tests were conducted by varying the dimensions of the matrix examined, first on a well-conditioned matrix and then on Hilbert matrices. The results obtained in the tests with well-conditioned matrices perfectly follow the theoretical predictions. However, in the tests with Hilbert matrices, the effect of matrix ill-conditioning on machine algebra computation was noticeable. It was highlighted that the method terminated using the residual stopping criterion without reaching a satisfactory solution.
The third chapter is dedicated to the quantum HHL algorithm. First, two fundamental subroutines for various quantum algorithms, especially HHL, are presented. A section provides a step-by-step theoretical explanation of the algorithm, while another section discusses the theoretical advantage of the quantum algorithm and its limitations, a crucial issue in the development of quantum technologies and their applications. The last part of the thesis is devoted to testing. After constructing the algorithm and verifying its correctness, two tests were conducted. The first test was on an ideal simulator, yielding excellent results, while the second test was performed on the real quantum computer Perth, yielding less favorable results due to quantum noise affecting the hardware used.
